MCP Server setup instructions [DOCS-11618] (#31001)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/bits_ai/mcp_server/setup/_index.md

---

{{< callout url="https://www.datadoghq.com/product-preview/datadog-mcp-server/" >}}
The Datadog MCP Server is in Preview. If you're interested in this feature and need access, complete this form. Read more about the MCP Server on the <a href="https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/datadog-remote-mcp-server/">Datadog blog</a>.
{{< /callout >}}

## Overview

The Datadog MCP Server acts as a bridge between your observability data in Datadog and AI agents that support the [Model Context Protocol (MCP)][6]. Providing structured access to relevant Datadog contexts, features, and tools, the MCP Server lets you query and retrieve observability insights directly from AI-powered clients such as Cursor, OpenAI Codex, Claude Code, or your own AI agent.

This page provides instructions for connecting your AI agent to the Datadog MCP Server, lists the available tools, and includes example prompts.

## Connect to the Datadog MCP Server

The following instructions are for all [MCP-compatible clients](#client-compatibility). For VS Code or Cursor, use the [Datadog extension](#connect-in-vs-code-or-cursor) for built-in access to the Datadog MCP Server.

{{< tabs >}}

> {{% tab "Remote authentication" %}}

Author: Added in 706c3e9dea11a45133f8d30f0df9ec8e696f2a1f

    * Windows: Download the [Windows version][1].

2. Run `datadog_mcp_cli login` manually to walk through the OAuth login flow.  

    The MCP Server automatically starts the OAuth flow if a client needs it, but doing it manually lets you choose a [Datadog site][2] and avoid the AI client timing out.

3. Configure your AI client to use the Datadog MCP Server. Follow your client's configuration instructions, as MCP Server setup varies between third-party AI clients.

    For example, for Claude Code, add this to `~/.claude.json`, making sure to replace `<USERNAME>` in the command path:

      ```json
      {
        "mcpServers": {
          "datadog": {
            "type": "stdio",
            "command": "/Users/<USERNAME>/.local/bin/datadog_mcp_cli",
            "args": [],
            "env": {}
          }
        }
      }
      ```

    Alternatively, you can also configure Claude Code by running the following:
      ```bash
      claude mcp add datadog --scope user -- ~/.local/bin/datadog_mcp_cli
      ```

[1]: https://coterm.datadoghq.com/mcp-cli/datadog_mcp_cli.exe
[2]: /getting_started/site/
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### Authentication

> The MCP Server uses OAuth 2.0 for [authentication][8]. If you cannot go through the OAuth flow (for example, on a server), you can provide a Datadog [API key and application key][9] as variables in the header of the MCP Server configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MCP Server uses OAuth 2.0 for [authentication][8]. If you cannot go through the OAuth flow (for example, on a server), you can provide a Datadog [API key and application key][9] as `DD_API_KEY` and `DD_APPLICATION_KEY` HTTP headers. For example:
```

The "variables" wording was unclear, better to clarify that these are HTTP headers... that's our fault, the wording was like that in our release notes 🙇

{{< code-block lang="json" >}}
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "datadog": {
      "type": "http",
      "url": "https://mcp.datadoghq.com/api/unstable/mcp-server/mcp",
      "headers": { 
          "DD_API_KEY": "<your-api-key>", 
          "DD_APPLICATION_KEY": "<your-application-key>"
      }
    }
  }
}
{{< /code-block >}}

### Test access to the MCP Server

1. Install the [MCP inspector](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/inspector), a developer tool for testing and debugging MCP servers.

    ```bash
    npx @modelcontextprotocol/inspector
    ```
2. In the inspector's web UI, for **Transport Type**, select **Streamable HTTP**.
3. For **URL**, enter the [MCP Server URL](#connect-to-the-datadog-mcp-server) for your regional Datadog site.
4. Click **Connect**, then go to **Tools** > **List Tools**.
5. Check if the [available tools](#available-tools) appear.

## Client compatibility

The following AI clients are compatible with the Datadog MCP Server.

> <div class="alert alert-info">Datadog MCP Server is under significant development, and additional supported clients may become available.</div>

Reviewer 2: I like the phrasing you chose for the callout text! Tells people that more clients may be coming, but doesn't promise anything. Is in present tense, and is unlikely to become outdated.

> | Client | Developer | Notes |

Reviewer 2: Good use of a table to present structured data.

   - Cursor: Go to **Cursor Settings** (`Shift` + `Cmd/Ctrl` + `J`) and select the **Tools & Integrations** tab.
3. Install the Datadog extension following [these instructions][3]. If you have the extension installed already, make sure it's the latest version, as new features are released regularly.  
4. Sign in to your Datadog account. If you have multiple accounts, use the account included in your Product Preview.
    {{< img src="bits_ai/mcp_server/ide_sign_in.png" alt="Sign in to Datadog from the IDE extension" style="width:70%;" >}}
5. Open a project or workspace.
6. **Restart the IDE.**
7. Confirm the Datadog MCP Server is available and the [tools](#available-tools) are listed in your IDE:
    - VS Code: Open the chat panel, select Agent mode, and click the **Configure Tools** button.
       {{< img src="bits_ai/mcp_server/vscode_configure_tools_button.png" alt="Configure Tools button in VS Code" style="width:70%;" >}}
    - Cursor: Go to **Cursor Settings** (`Shift` + `Cmd/Ctrl` + `J`), and select the **Tools & Integrations** tab.

## Available tools

This section lists the tools available in the Datadog MCP Server and provides example prompts for using them.

> <div class="alert alert-warning">Datadog MCP Server tools are under significant development and are subject to change. We encourage you to share any feedback, use cases, or issues encountered with your prompts and queries.</div>

Reviewer 2: Why is this callout a warning, when the previous one was info? Also, please reword this to avoid the first person pronoun.

### `ask_docs`
Returns AI-generated answers to Datadog questions, sourced from [Datadog documentation][4].

> - "How do you enable Datadog profiling in Python?"

Reviewer 2: Would you consider formatting all of these lists without the quotation marks? I think it may look better and still be understandable. It's a matter of opinion, though, so please go with what you prefer.

Author: I tried it out on my local build, but to me it looked weird to have questions without punctuation. Only a few of the prompts are questions, so it doesn't affect most of the examples.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, let me be more specific. I wasn't referring to the question marks. I meant the quotes. See the suggestion text below.
```suggestion
- How do you enable Datadog profiling in Python?
```

Author: 🤦 Oh wow, sorry I totally misread that! No quotation marks sounds promising; I'll try it out...

- "What's the best way to correlate logs and traces?"
- "How does RUM auto-instrumentation work?"

### `get_active_hosts_count`
Returns the number of active and up hosts in Datadog.

- "How many hosts are currently active in our infrastructure?"
- "Show me the active host count from the last 2 hours."

> - "What's our current infrastructure size based on active hosts?"

Reviewer: The `get_active_hosts_count` tool is gone now

### `get_events`
Searches events like monitor alerts, deployment notifications, infrastructure changes, security findings, and service status changes.

- "Show me all deployment events from the last 24 hours."
- "Find events related to our production environment with error status."
- "Get events tagged with `service:api` from the past hour."

**Note**: See the [Event Management API][5] for more details.

### `get_incident`
Retrieves detailed information about an incident.

- "Get details for incident ABC123."
- "What's the status of incident ABC123?"
- "Retrieve full information about the Redis incident from yesterday."

> **Note**: The tool is operational but does not include incident timeline data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note**: The tool is operational, but does not include incident timeline data.
```

---

{{< callout url="https://www.datadoghq.com/product-preview/datadog-mcp-server/" >}}
The Datadog MCP Server is in Preview. If you're interested in this feature and need access, complete this form. Read more about the MCP Server on the <a href="https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/datadog-remote-mcp-server/">Datadog blog</a>.
{{< /callout >}}

## Overview

The Datadog MCP Server acts as a bridge between your observability data in Datadog and AI agents that support the [Model Context Protocol (MCP)][1]. Providing structured access to relevant Datadog contexts, features, and tools, the MCP Server lets you query and retrieve observability insights directly from AI-powered clients such as Cursor, OpenAI Codex, Claude Code, or your own AI agent.

This page provides instructions for connecting your AI agent to the Datadog MCP Server, lists the available tools, and includes example prompts.

## Client compatibility

The following AI clients are compatible with the Datadog MCP Server.

<div class="alert alert-info">Datadog MCP Server is under significant development, and additional supported clients may become available.</div>

| Client | Developer | Notes |
|--------|------|------|

> | [Cursor][8] | Anysphere | Datadog [Cursor &VS Code extension](#connect-in-vs-code-or-cursor) recommended. |

Author: ```suggestion
| [Cursor][8] | Anysphere | Datadog [Cursor & VS Code extension](#connect-in-vs-code-or-cursor) recommended. |
```
